Peter, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
Awesome to have you here.
Hi, Michael and my fellow Python developers.
Yeah, it's real good to have you here.
I know that there was a lot of excitement about Flet.
In fact, I got a message
just a couple of weeks ago from somebody saying,
"Is Flet what you used to write your mobile apps?"
I'm like, "No, because that was a while ago."
I wish that was an option,
but it wasn't an option for us at the time.
Anyway, I think Flutter is going strong.
I think there's a lot of excitement around it.
And certainly there's an excitement
for building mobile applications in Python.
- Sure, yeah.
Yeah, Flutter is getting stronger and stronger.
Like recently I saw there was an attempt
to fork Flutter, you know, because like there was a feeling in the community that it's not
moving anywhere, you know, but I don't believe that. Even that guy mentioned that there are
like 50 developers working on Flutter right now at Google. So yeah, Flutter is getting
better and better and their release cycle is pretty awesome, you know? It's really hard
to catch up.
I know. That can actually be a problem. I just updated Flutter on my Mac Mini, and I had out-of-date CocoaPods and Ruby, and there's a whole tool chain that people need to know about. Maybe we can talk a little bit about the tool chain. But yeah, you're constantly chasing versions and releases and updates. And then you've got Android Studio versions. You've got Xcode. There's a lot there.
Yeah.
You know, we recently started using Flutter version manager, FEM, and it's pretty good.
Yeah, because they're updating so fast, you know, it's really hard to catch on.
Yeah, it sure is.
All right, we'll talk about that in just a second, but maybe a quick introduction.
It has been, you know, I guess it's worth giving a shout out back in summer 2022,
You were on the show when Flutter first came out to tell everyone about Flutter and how it's basically Flutter plus Python for UI.
But it's been a while.
So, you know, tell people quickly who you are and we can get into the project.
Sure.
My name is Theodore Fittsner and I'm the founder and developer of Flutter Framework.
like flutter for Python for flutter yeah it's been two and a half years since we released the first
version it's not like the first version but the first release of that and since that time we gain
really great traction to my mind like we got 12,000 stars on GitHub with
semi-check contributors 5k members on this core channel and I found the
statistics for PiPi it's like almost 3 million downloads from PiPi of web
package. So it's pretty great. It's a great community, great people, a lot of feedback,
a lot of issues. So it's pretty nice. So, yeah.
Yeah, that's awesome. And it definitely seems like it's going strong. I do think maybe it's worth
actually talking a bit about what Flutter is before we dive into Python for Flutter with Flutter,
right?
Give people a quick sense of what is this Flutter thing that we're talking about.
Sure.
Yeah.
So Flutter is a cross-platform framework.
It works for web, iOS, Android, and all desktop platforms.
It allows you to write nice apps, really nice apps with great UI in dark language.
So you have to learn a new language.
And Flutter is a framework.
So it's not just UI, it's application framework.
It has all the things to build the app and publish it.
Yeah, there's the language, which is Dart, not Flutter.
But then Flutter has all the UI widgets and the mechanisms.
But it also is a whole series of build tools that will take that and create things
that you can upload to the mobile app stores like Apple's App Store or Google Play
or other places, like desktop apps.
So there's a bunch of layers to what Flutter really is, I think.
Yeah, and also the interesting part about Flutter is that it has like painted UI.
So it started from the Sphere Engine, and now they have their own engine impeller.
So the UI is basically like painted on the canvas.
So it looks similar everywhere on every device.
Like some frameworks, like for example, React Native,
they use native controls.
But Flutter, it looks similar on every device.
So this is the nice thing.
The thing that's nice, you know,
it's cool that it runs everywhere,
but sometimes that can fall short.
The biggest example of this for me is Java applications.
when they have their own file browsing dialogue,
you're like, oh, this is not,
this is clearly not a native sort of thing going on here,
you know, on a desktop situation.
They don't look like Windows dialogues.
They don't look like macOS dialogues.
They just look like Java dialogues.
But, so that can be a problem or limitation.
But Flutter tries to look like the native controls, right?
And there's the, what do they call them?
The Cupertino widgets and the material design widgets
that, so it tries to adapt to the platforms it's on.
- Yeah, this one is called Adaptive, yeah.
So yeah, it's like this material design is built in,
there is Cupertino controls.
Also, I thought there are
third body packages for macOS and Windows like doing design.
By the way, about dialog, you know, if like this, it's called file picker
and it looks different for all platforms.
So it's not always drawn like the UI.
You can write like a native package, like using the underlying operating system API.
So the dialogue looks pretty standard on macOS or Windows.
So yeah, it's not always so bad.
Yeah, yeah, no, it's good.
It is for building apps all over the place, Flutter.
But I would say it's real traction seems to be in the mobile app space, right?
What do you think?
Primarily iOS and Android?
Yeah, someone recently asked me about like why not Rack Native?
So why you chose?
And I went to Google like, you know, like typing like Flutter DS Rack Native.
And interesting, it became more popular this year, 2024.
So it's a little bit ahead of React Native Flutter in this year.
Wow.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So it's according to Stack Overflow questionnaire, something like that.
So, yeah, it's gaining popularity.
And I would say, yes, Flutter is more a model-fast framework.
despite they have awesome support for desktop platforms or web. It's still mobile first. And
when we talked about water, we should probably talk first about mobile devices. Yeah. And these
benefits, it brings to mobile development. That's right. Yeah. Yeah, it's pretty interesting. I just
looked on Stack Overflow Trends.
Let's see if I can find it.
And yeah, look at that.
The Flutter
is quite a bit higher than React
Native. More than I
expected.
Yeah. Okay.
I'll put a link to that in the show notes for the
Stack Overflow Trends graph.
Yeah.
What are the reasons behind that?
You know, it's...
Yeah.
Maybe it's
it's ecosystem, maybe because it's pretty easy to find an extension, find like some nice package on pop.dev, you know.
Maybe it's because it looks nice on both iOS and Android, it looks similar, maybe.
Maybe because, you know, Dart itself, I know people tend to criticize Dart, but I have some experience writing in JavaScript, TypeScript, and I can say that it was really nice learning Dart.
And it's a great language.
And honestly, I know it's unpopular, but I feel it's kind of like better, you know, than JavaScript.
It's just my opinion.
So once you learn it, you can do everything.
It's pretty nice.
Maybe because of that.
Yeah, yeah, perhaps, perhaps.
And before we move off Flutter, just real quick,
I want to give a quick shout out to Lauren, the developer
I worked with.
He and I built the Talk Python courses apps in Flutter,
which is why I have more than just reading the docs
experience in it.
And those apps are going strong today.
They're really great.
Although, I'm about to release a new version,
because you never stop releasing new versions,
even if you think you're done.
Something changes behind the scenes with iOS or Android.
This time it's Android.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
All the time.
That package that used to do this thing,
it doesn't do it anymore.
Oh, no.
OK.
Yeah.
OK, so that's the foundation.
That's Flutter.
Flet.
Tell us about Flet.
I mean, you talked about the downloads,
but where does it fit in this Flutter ecosystem?
So, well, it's not a flat is a, is a, is a, a pionated framework.
It's not just, as you can think, it's not just translated to, from Python to Dart.
It's not just bindings for Flutter widgets, like PyQt, PySight, for example.
but it's a standalone framework that uses Flutter for its UI.
So Flutter is an application framework.
It's not just UI.
And it uses Flutter to build its UI.
Yeah.
I see.
So people should think of it more as an independent UI
and application framework for Python,
not so much as an extension of Flutter into the Python world.
Is that maybe the way you think of it?
Right.
We're still trying to go away from this label, you know.
It's kind of – but it works really nice, like,
right Flutter apps in Python.
It works pretty good, like, in terms of CEO, for example.
But it's not true.
it's a framework that uses...
We could, like, I mean, potentially we could replace it
with something else, like this backend, you know,
with, like, Compose or, you know, React Native.
But no, it's flat.
And it's really great.
We have our own controls, and it's not always one-to-one,
little maybe but it's it's like uh many of flat controls uh they are built out of like multiple
flutter widgets so we combine multiple flutter widgets into controls uh yeah because sometimes
if you if you have some flutter experience sometimes you can notice that it's getting really
uh dui getting really um uh complex or like you know leather like a lot of um um
controls like wrapped into like widgets right into other widgets like for example
if you want to center something there is a center widget if you want to limit the size there is size
box. So flat combines many widgets into more like controls
and those are properties. So it's like it's it's clutter in
serve to fighting developers in Pythonic way. I would say
Okay, nice. And on your people want to browse these controls
widgets, what do you want to call them? There's a whole
controls section in your docs. And I'll link to the docs, but just on the left, it says controls.
And you go there, there's layout controls, navigation controls, you know, app bar type
things that you might expect from standard mobile apps. And of course, like I sort of pointed out,
you got the Cupertino versions, and you've got the non-Cupertino material design versions. So
people can have a look at that and just get a sense for all the controls. But there are many.
How many controls do you know off the top of your head?
Oh, it's like 100 plus, I would say.
Yeah. And some really nice ones, right? Like you've got a web
view, you've got maps, animations, charts, quite a bit.
Yeah, web view is not available for like for all platforms at the
moment. It's mostly for mobile and for micro S if I'm not mistaken. So
Yeah, it's kind of like there is a lot of limitation right now that for Windows that
doesn't allow to have a proper web view on Windows platform, for example.
Oh, yes, I remember that. That's, yeah, what a hassle.
But yeah, there is work going on.
Yeah. So, you know, you were on the show before to talk about Flet and
Those were pretty early days then, right?
To over two years ago.
A lot of you've been, you're going strong.
Like you said, you talked about the downloads and the contributors and stars and all that.
That's awesome.
So what have you all been up to?
Where's this effort gone?
Like what progress have you made?
So yeah, we started from pretty simple design.
it was it was pre-built executable for every platform mostly like for desktop platform which
is uh which is able to display all controls we have and that executable was an ease part of a
wheel flat wheel you install so if you do keep install clap you install this executable with the
with the with the python api itself but then we uh we started getting more and more requests
like asking like how would i put all this beautiful stuff to to a mobile device or how do i do a
standalone app and well the answer is we should generate executable and fight and should be part
of it why don't your program set by the libraries you use for the program all this stuff should be
part of this executable so we started it's been a lot of work to produce standalone package
for desktop for web and for for model so flutter is a good start for that so the question was
Python itself and third-party packages. So we decided that, okay, Python, for desktop platform,
it's pretty straightforward. You just take regular Python and bundle it
into your executable or application bundle and that's it. So it's pretty
straightforward. For mobile devices there is a challenge and we know that
multiple projects when I working on this problem like the most popular Kyvi and
beware those guys started back started solving this problem back in 2010 maybe
2012 if I'm not mistaken and they did really great job and they still doing
great you know so yeah i know beware's got a lot of uh recent support as well through the anaconda
team which is really great yeah yeah yeah sure absolutely yeah so we will we'll get back to be
where yeah like okay but so we started from kavi uh i don't know at that point like two years ago
i uh i thought that i saw maybe that kadi is more popular and i decided to explore
like this way whether kadi could be used as a foundation for plant or we can grab portions of
kadi and make something different you know and uh well uh it was a good it was a good for uh for
the start obviously and we managed to to use uh kaii uh tooling like python for android
python for ios and their command line and their libraries and their recipes to
compile runtime python runtime and third party modules and use them in application so i mean
there was study you know um and um well you guys ended up moving off of it right yes uh so um
recipes wasn't great and it's still a great idea but there are there were limitations you know like
like first of all um kind of recipes some of those recipes they're pretty outdated
so i tried building a few recipes so i forked i forked and tried building um
new recipes by myself and uh it wasn't it wasn't an easy task you know it's uh kind of so recipes
uh in like it's it's it's basically python code and uh there are a lot of uh um historic stuff
you know it's uh you should know about like a lot of debugging so i was uh i was really struggling
uh trying to build uh new recipes and update existing recipes in uh for kyle you know
and also the biggest the biggest issue with uh with the caddy caddy's approach was uh so you have to
build all all the python runtime and all the modules like packages by yourself all the time
like if you're a user yeah it's it's kind of it's kind of paid so you you should you should
have android sdk installed and all environment variables in place you know like and i mean it
could be a real struggle to build and it's it takes time sometimes like if you if you add
numpy pandas to your app as a dependencies it could take like half an hour to build all the
packages and fingers crossed you know like whether it finishes okay you know or you get some weird
pretty error so yeah it wasn't it wasn't nice you know it wasn't it wasn't nice i mean it worked
this approach worked for uh simple things you know with the where your app requires fewer
Python packages. But if it's not something trivial, it's either no recipe or outdated recipe,
or you have to build your own recipe, etc, etc. So the recipe is basically saying how to build
some particular library or Python itself for Android or for iOS or something. Is that right?
yeah yeah we can we can dig we can dig into that yeah but it's kind of basically like settings
it's it's a bunch of settings for compiler for linker uh and uh how to move resulting files you
know and yeah that that doesn't sound that easy yeah oh yeah absolutely yeah it's uh it's c c plus
plus yeah i can i can i can talk about this later you know it's yeah yeah no it's probably
probably people get enough of an idea from it.
Is this, I know that you were using
or you published serious Python.
Is this sort of your answer to that?
Yeah, so as we do open source
and Kali and other projects are open source,
I thought maybe it's a good idea
to contribute something to open source, right?
I mean, we can do this as a part of our application template, for example,
and not dealing with this plugin, you know,
but I thought maybe someone else would be interested in using Python with your Flutter app.
So, Serious Python is really low-level package
that allows you to embed Python engine into your platter
application. So yeah, so in the I'm not sure if it's even
popular, you know, but maybe someone can use it for some
purposes.
Yeah, that's, it's nice. Do you do anything with Python build
standalone, you know, uv is started making it really easy to
install Python, all the different platforms of it by leveraging
Python build standalone that was previously run by Greg now by
Astral. Yes. Or do you do something else? Yeah, like where
you build
GitHub project building every version of fighting. Yeah.
platforms, right? Yeah, we use we use this, this repository for
desktop so yeah we use this repository for desktop as a starting point and we don't want
pre-built python from that repo and we actually repackaged it so for me for mobile uh now we use
a different approach and i can talk about this for for web uh for web we use uh while you die right
Yeah, well, let's maybe talk for a little bit about the runtime side of things,
and we could talk about packaging after that.
So Flutter goes into all different places, more than most platforms.
You can build desktop apps.
You can build mobile apps.
You can also build web apps, kind of a competitor to Angular or something like that, right?
And if you're going to have Python runtimes in these different locations,
and that's kind of why I was asking about Python build standalone is,
you know, there's all these variations of places it could be,
which is quite tricky, right?
So the web version is WASM WebAssembly based, right?
Yep, yep, yep.
so um yes right now um flat web app could be uh deployed in two like moments in two states like
client side and the service side so if it's deployed as a server-side app obviously the
Flutter part runs in the browser and Python runs in the server and it's standard Python
with any module you can use anything and client part client side talks to server by websockets
So all UI changes are streamed via web sockets to a client,
and all events go back to server-side.
So this is one mode.
It's called server-side.
And another mode is client-side or static web-side.
You can build, you can publish web app as a static website
and put it on Cloudflare or GitHub pages or whatever you like.
Nice.
Yeah, you put the WebAssembly files there,
and it just picks it up and goes, right?
Yeah.
Okay.
It's Flutter itself and Python FireDive,
which is WebAssembly, which is Python and WebAssembly.
So we don't compile Flutter,
flat Flutter part into WebAssembly yet
because we have a lot of dependencies
and not all of them support Wasm.
But it's definitely on our roadmap
and we have a branch trying to produce
new spasming builds. So it would be really nice because the size would be much smaller,
the size of a Flutter web would be much slower. It's probably like right now it's 10 megabytes
maybe and it's going to be like two megabytes something. So it's going to be really nice
when we when we do that.
Yeah, that'd be great. And with the right amount of caching, the right style of caching
You know, it's not that big of a deal, right?
Yeah, I know.
And yeah, PyGuy is a pretty strong project.
It has the biggest number of packages supported.
So it's great.
I mean, it got really great support.
Yeah, I believe that the Python core devs are also working on getting Python itself
to be officially built for WebAssembly.
I know Brett Cannon's done a ton of work for this as well.
Does that help you guys in any way?
Absolutely, yeah.
So actually, right now we use built-in Python support.
So we migrated from Kyvi to this approach.
And it's thanks to Beware guys, Russell and Malcolm.
So Russell is iOS, Malcolm is Android.
So they did a great, a really great job putting like this iOS and Android support into Python
project itself. And now they like actually they implemented this support for Python 3.13
and backported to lower versions. So yeah, absolutely. It's like when I first
first saw the proposal you know it's for iOS first of all I really like it
you know it's really great I mean like the way producing binary libraries you
know like for and packaging them it's really good because we can use dynamic
libraries versus static libraries in Kavi. Like in Kavi everything like uh like all these third-party
modules uh you compile your machine every time they produce static libraries basically like.a
files for ios and finally and they like the entire code base is like it's it's a single executable at
the end you know like everything like noon pie like all this stuff is a single file i mean and
you cannot reuse uh some of those libraries you know like when when you package them into ios f
so yeah when uh when i saw uh i really loved the approach and uh i and i understood you know that
it's probably uh the way going forward you know and uh you see it's kind of like it's it's getting
like a standard right now and it allows this approach allows you to have uh binary wheels
that are pre-built and put somewhere on not on pipi.org yet they don't support this model
tags yet but you can publish them on a custom uh feed you know and use and all users all your
users uh they can download them from that location you know that's it yeah that's about building
yeah so it's uh it's great it's standard and in the future we can we can use pre-built um wheels
by like project maintainers, you know,
like if NumPy for example, decide releasing those wheels,
we can use them because we follow these standards,
you know, like, so we use like standard plan time.
- Excellent.
And the NumPy folks, for example, as you said,
they could use their expertise to get NumPy,
this NumPy C code and Python code to build for WebAssembly
and just put that in as automation and GitHub
and everyone else in the world doesn't have to solve it
over and over, right?
- Yeah, I think it's, I mean, the Python 3.13 Python itself
is pretty fresh, you know?
It's, many packages are still on,
like don't support it, right? So I believe like in at some point,
those projects will start doing their will start producing their
own iOS and Android wheels and publishing them to buy by once
it's supported. So yeah, and of course, they can reuse our
expertise. Yeah,
yeah, you're, you're making me dream, dream big, you know, like
wheels for iOS and wheels for Android. Could you imagine a day where it's as easy to just
get libraries for the mobile platforms as it is for Mac or Linux or whatever?
Yeah. It's still, I can tell it's still not many people working in this area. And
but i can tell you it's like modern processors more than cpus in android and ios uh like apple
devices they're pretty powerful you know and i remember the way a lot of like at those times like
toward 2012 2010 when uh kylie and the bware started there were a lot of issues trying to
squeeze this desktop C code into a mobile processor.
Now it's much easier.
Most of those packages could be compiled as is
without any tricks, without any patches, you know?
- Wow. - So, yeah.
So it's pretty nice.
Maybe, yeah, in the future we will have this
as a standard thing, you know?
- Yeah.
Last PyCon or maybe the Python before.
I think it was Salt Lake.
Anyway, it doesn't really matter.
Recently, Carol Willing at the PyCon US keynote
talked about how mobile is such an important platform.
And there's people like you and Russell Keith-Magee
and the Beware team working on it.
But I think it feels a little chicken and an egg to me.
You know, if it was a little easier, I think a bunch of, there would be a huge bunch of
people that jump into it.
But there's, it's like, it takes projects like Flet and the Beware one to just kind of
unlock it.
And then I think once it gets unlocked, people are going to realize and just go for it, you
know?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
It's, it's having Python on the mobile devices is pretty awesome.
know it's like for Android for example it's it's it adds maybe like eight
megabytes of size to your app so it's not so large you and it makes sense
fighting is a great language it's it's it's great for for beginners you know for
scientists so it's it's it's really I don't know like addicted you know like
to write the apps for everything in Python I I become like I've been using
fighting for three years already and I still love it you know like I write most
of my like even like streets you know like in in Python like so I I'm working
in a lot of programming languages myself, static and dynamic ones. Python is comfortable.
It's nice. Yeah. All right. I want to talk about packaging. And I know that's the area
that you've been working on a lot as well. And as a segue, let's take a question from
the audience. Alan out there asks, I'm someone taking a careful look at Flet. My question
is what is the process of getting a finished app reviewed by apple or google i think let me
rephrase that into a slightly different
part because the reviewed by apple or google there's like a voodoo doll and you stick it with
a few pins and then you like rub it with an oil and then they they approve your app right like that
seems to be the process it's been so hard but yeah i think the thing is how do you get it
built in a way that you can submit it to the App Store?
And then it's just down to it, right?
So what's the process?
So this is one of those rough questions.
You know, it's--
and you should have a list of rough questions
you're ready to answer.
So right now, you can build your APK for A/B for Android.
you can sign it, but you have to upload the file manually right now into--
I see.
So you have to sideload it basically at the moment.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I mean, you produce--
so flag build command allows you to build an AAB file, which is basically APK for multiple
platforms signing.
And then you upload it by yourself through the web interface of Google Play.
Oh, let me go back then. That's not sideloading it. That's just not having it auto upload.
Yeah.
But yeah, okay. That's encouraging.
So we have our own flat app in both Google Play and App Store. It's for testing apps on mobile devices.
It basically like the same flatline that connects to app through web circuits and the app itself is running on your machine.
So yeah, and honestly, right now we publish it with Fastlane.
So there is a CI job that publishes both iOS and Android versions with Fastlane.
I'm not sure. Maybe we will do the instructions how to use Fastlane because it's a great tool.
And it's pretty easy to synchronize certificates, you know, for App Store and publish your app and make that information for app.
So, yeah, but right now you can build IP, you can build AAB, but you have to upload them manually.
I think that's fine.
Yeah, and then the review process starts.
That's the voodoo doll part, where you get the voodoo doll out and you hit it with the needles.
Yeah, yeah, but I can tell you, people are usually concerned about whether is it allowed to have Python,
stuff like that in your app, and would it be approved by Apple, by Google?
And I can tell you, it works pretty well.
We dock food our own stuff.
So we build CLAT app using CLAT.
So the way it's packaged inside, it's getting approved.
There are some issues, I can tell you,
there are some issues.
For example, disable, we use to disable X86 devices
Then like Google Play,
virtual machines, they show just like a black screen.
The market share for those devices is pretty small right now.
So we disabled that.
So it took us to review.
Yeah.
It works.
Nice. Awesome.
Okay. I want to talk through
the publishing workflow that you all have with the new CLI tools you got.
But let's just dive into one more thing real quick.
So when I have my Python code running, let's just say iOS,
I have my Python code running on an iPhone.
What does the runtime look like?
Is that regular CPython?
Can I add a standard package as a wheel?
Like, could I use HTTPX?
Like, what is the story around the execution environment
and the external packages and so on?
So, well, yeah, it's CPython.
And as I said, right now we use all this serious Python package.
It uses Python that is built by those scripts which are part of Python 3.13.
So, like, theoretically, if you go there to Python repository
and look into those folders, you will see instructions.
You can follow those instructions and build runtime,
build c python for both ios and android but yes this is it's not blossom it's c python compiled
into native ios or android code like for for platform not like code assemble and binary packages
yes you have to repackage you have to build binary packages targeting those platforms as well and
And for that purposes, we use a model forge project by Beware.
It's pretty nice.
It's an awesome project.
It's a brainchild of Malcolm and Russell.
And yeah.
So in its turn, it uses cross-env package,
which is basically the way to simulate,
like it allows you to create a virtual environment in Python
things that it's being run on a mobile device, you know?
So it's like, basically,
Mobile Forge is like you do pip install something,
And it feels like for Python, it feels like it's being run this command on a mobile device.
And it uses, like if it's binary package and there is setup.py or PyProjectTOML, it uses mobile compilers, cross compilers to build.so file.
I see.
So if a pip install action requires a local build of something, it will use the mobile compilers with the target platform being like iPhone or whatever.
Right, right. So it's like the whole package, like this cross-env, it tweaks Python into thinking it's kind of like running on a mobile device, you know?
and it has these compilers, this archiver, this linker, you know, etc.
So, like, it's a pretty smart thing, you know?
Yeah.
Like, in most cases, so you should do a recipe,
but this time, recipe is basically a YAML file.
It's kind of like meta.yaml.
And in most cases, if it's standard C, if it's simple package, you don't have to do anything.
It works right away.
You can build it for Android.
You can build it for iOS.
It takes literally minutes to produce a binary wheel for both platforms.
Wow.
Okay.
That's fantastic.
Yeah.
That's really cool.
I'll definitely link that in the show notes.
All right.
Back to wherever I put it.
the publishing side of things.
So maybe we could talk through a little bit about
the CLI and the process.
Tell us how we go through this to get something built here.
So the first release of web,
we're using the so-called web offering
flat path command and using pi installer uh to produce executable but it works for desktop
platforms as well only and um to produce uh depending on the bundle for mobile platform it's
it's uh you you need to do more it's uh well it's still possible as those guys are basically
zip files inside you know you can you can build the a b you can build the apk you can build ipa
by yourself or using uh xcode tools and it's like it's the approach uh beware takes for example so
they uh their briefcase it it builds um like packages basically from scratch you know but
uh for flutter we use we require to use flutter sdk so there is a new command
flat build which uses flutter sdk and it's basically like a wrapper around the flutter build
which allows you to build the app for desktop for web for mobile so inside we take
template, we take template and we create a new Flutter app and we build this Flutter app.
Right.
And just for people listening, the template looks something like, here's a folder with
a bunch of images and here's a main.py and a pyproject.toml, stuff that Python people
would be familiar with.
Yeah.
So this is template for the app and the template for Flutter app, it's something
you don't have to look into that, you know, it's like, but--
- Yeah, it gets kind of complicated
for the different platforms and linking them.
- Yeah, you know, the problem with this,
with Flutter is like the difference,
because we wanna support extensions.
We wanna allow people using those nice extensions,
packages on.dev.
So we cannot have the same process at the time.
we should really run a flutter build to like for example include a media key for video control or audio players package for audio control.
So it's not the same. It's always so it should be built from Dart to this you know code flutter produces.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a lot of what Flutter is.
It's like orchestrating all the pieces
to build into the right stuff to go into the mobile apps.
Exactly.
Yeah.
OK, so we've got this pyproject.toml.
And you even have a create CLI command,
like flet create my app or whatever.
Yeah.
And it will go and get that all out there, right?
So really nice.
Yeah, it's all recent stuff.
And it's still pretty rough, but it's great.
Yeah, and here you have flat build and then target platform.
And where target platform is APK, that is Android, AAB, IPA,
which is iOS, web, macOS, Windows, and Linux.
That's a pretty impressive list of package destinations
for building an executable.
So if I build-- let's suppose this.
If I build a, let's say Windows, if I say target equals Windows, what files or file or
executable or what do I get when I run that?
Do I get just a dot exe?
Do I get a dot exe with DLLs or a whole bunch of other stuff?
Yeah, unfortunately, it's not a single dot exe, but it's exe and a bunch of DLLs.
Yes, if you look inside that folder, you'll see this executable, then Python itself, Python
runtime, which is a bunch of lead files, you know, and DLLs, Python files themselves.
Then your app coming as a zip file.
and also
different kind of DLLs
from plugins
from extension packages
like for video for example
it's going to be like
four more DLLs
something
it's a bunch of
things
but
it's something I could put into
and install it or copy
to a Windows machine and then
create a shortcut to the.exe.
It looks like an app to the user.
Yeah, you can make self-extracting archive or MSI.
Yeah, exactly.
Okay, and for macOS?
For macOS, it's a bundle.
Is it a.app bundle?
Yeah,.app, yeah.
But it's a standard bundle that looks like a folder,
but it's a folder, you know?
So it works like a charm, you know, like having the right structure.
Again, the app inside is part of a Flutter asset, which is like, it's called like car file.
It's not like even a zip, it's car file, which has all the assets.
But again, it's a work in progress, you know.
Yeah.
Are you ready for the hard question now?
Those are awesome answers,
but here's the one that has been driving me crazy
is so many of these platforms,
by that I mean Windows and Mac,
have anti-malware, anti-phishing protections,
which is good,
but that means if you build a.app file
and just try to run it,
it'll say this is from an untrusted developer.
We'll probably, you want to move it to the trash?
You know what I mean?
Like the lack of notarization or on Windows
if it's not digitally signed with a trusted certificate,
it gets treated with like a yellow warning.
Is there a way to digitally sign these
or notarize them through Apple?
So, yeah, it's...
I know Flutter can do it.
So maybe you could shell,
maybe it shells down to the Flutter.
side of how that works?
But still, it looks
pretty complicated, you know.
Even from my perspective,
it looks pretty creepy.
But I have
this item
on my desk right now
to start from micro-IS
because there was a complaint from
one user
recently, like two days ago,
and I still had this issue.
So I'm going to work
on that and I'm going
provide like definitive answer it's not like I'm not gonna say like it's do
whatever you like no way I'm gonna go through all the steps because right
now we honestly we use it we don't even use sandbox mode in produce the
dot ATP file you know it's so we start from there and there was an issue with
the loading uh python binaries uh like nobody like package binaries i'm gonna i'm gonna solve
that problem as well so yeah definitely it's our next step yeah we uh it's as you see we're getting
closer and closer to building real apps and we're getting more and more developers building real apps
and they want to publish them it's not just uh um experimental you know anymore like they want to
publish them and and we are working on that right now like publish awesome yeah and it's actually
it's like number one priority for the next year you know i i tell you if you had that that dialed
I mean, that means that opens up desktop apps completely.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
So I will start from micro-s because I have probably a little bit more experience with micro-s right now.
And then I want to continue with the Windows Store.
I never published anything to Windows Store before, so it's going to be an interesting journey.
you know, but yeah, Windows Store as well.
Well, yeah, even if you just digitally signed it so that if you downloaded it off someone else's website,
it wouldn't go, oh my gosh, this is an executable that's untrusted.
Run away, you know?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's right.
We actually sign our MSIs right now for other products.
And it's kind of like conspiracy, you know?
So you have to use a really expensive certificate to pass through, what was it, like screen,
Windows screen, something like.
So it's not just even like code signing and not even easy code signing.
No, it's something else.
Yeah.
On macOS, it's Gatekeeper and these sorts of things.
I remember it's like $600 per year, something like that, at least.
If you want to pass this Windows 11 screen. Yeah. Otherwise, it's always a warning. Always.
Yeah. Yeah. Where's the where's the let's encrypt for desktop apps? Come on,
people, somebody help us out. Where's the cert bot for let's for for desktop apps. But yeah,
you know, like it's there for a reason, because people kept getting wrecked by ransomware and
all sorts of stuff. But it does make building desktop apps challenging.
Well, yeah, but we'll get there, no worries.
Yeah, I love it.
I love it.
All right, what else should we say about this here?
I guess controls.
I know there was a question.
I see a video.
There was a question out in the audience also from Alan.
It's about camera controls.
Is this a thing that you guys support yet?
Sure.
we started working on that, but it's not like it was kind of like testing the waters, you know?
It's kind of like at this moment, we are trying to harmonize API, flat API, and as I see it right now,
we we're gonna split all controls into like visual controls and and so-called services so camera is
gonna be service because yeah right now it's sometimes it's it's kind of messy you know like
to use non-visual controls you have to add them like to overlay or something and uh like if you
jump to a different page, like audio could stop, you know, like, so we, we're going to
re-implement that. And the camera is true. Camera is the, is number one priority right now. That's
why there is a, there is a draft pull request and we're not closing it. So we, we keep it,
we keep it in mind all the time. Okay. The reason I even brought that up right now is because
part of this packaging process, you have to state things like your permissions that you're requesting,
like access to location. And you also have to include which optional controls you want to build,
like audio recorder or geolocation or maps and things like that, right?
Yep, and this is something we're going to change by the next release as well.
So we will make this process more streamlined and easier to add new controls or services and include them into build process.
Got it.
Well, even having them under a subsection of your PyProject.toml is pretty nice, actually.
Yeah, it looks standard, you know?
Yeah, it looks like it belongs, which is really nice, right?
And obviously, you've got icons and splash screens and all of those types of things
that you have to include in order to build, especially mobile apps, but even an icon for.app or.exe.
Mm-hmm. Yeah, yeah.
I guess one more thing. We got time for one more thing to call out here about this packaging side
or maybe two, but this one's pretty interesting,
is by default, FlutBuild will just pile your Python app together
and assume that it must be fine.
But you have a --compile app option
that will compile your Python files.
Now, people listening might think,
well, but there's no Python compiler.
There is a Python compiler.
You just don't do anything with it.
It's in the interpreter, right?
So when Python loads your Python files,
it converts it to a bytecode and then interprets it, right?
But you can have it compile that to PYC files,
which will detect problems, right?
That's kind of cool.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, tell people about that a bit.
One of the reasons we introduced those options
is that if you always compile
and there are some issues inside user code, the entire process fails.
I mean, even at least one single syntax error somewhere in your app leads to a failed build process.
So we introduced those options.
And also, you can disable compilation.
So it could be easy to debug your app.
But again, it's people asking, can I see what's going on?
If I downloaded your app and looked inside, can I see what's going on inside my app?
like can users see? Well, it's not the way to proper protect your app from someone like from looking into the logic.
You know, it's not 100% protection. So maybe you should use obfuscators.
And we have some ideas to build obfuscating.
Oh, really? I was thinking obfuscators were kind of like a separate thing. They're just
you're considering? Okay. It's, it's, it's, uncharted. I mean, like it's,
yeah. Imagine if, if it doesn't work, I mean, it's good if it works, like if you obfuscate it and it
works. But Python is pretty complex thing because it operates
by text files, you know, like, so you can break some paths, you
know, like module names, you know, like, and whatnot. I'm
not sure if it's even
Yeah, exactly. If it obfuscates the import statement, or it's
an import request, like that's not going to work anymore. Because
It needs to see it.
I want to play with that.
If I compile my Python files, my PY files,
does that omit them from the project
and only include the PYC files?
Or how does that work?
Sure.
Yeah, sure.
We remove.py.
Okay.
That's already pretty good levels of obfuscation.
There are disassemblers and decompilers for C code,
especially for.NET and Java.
You can get those back to almost source level decompilation sort of thing.
So, yeah, that's kind of close to it.
At least close to it.
I would say it puts it on par with.NET level of obfuscation.
Yeah.
All right.
The last thing I guess we should talk about real quick is just permission.
So if you live in this mobile world, this is androidmanifest.xml or info.plist or.entitlements and all these things.
And so you support these platform-specific deals pretty much because Flutter supports them, right?
Mm-hmm.
So it's not like pre-canned permissions.
the you can put anything you like it's basically it's whatever you put here
into PyProjectTOML or common line arguments it goes you know directly to
this flat build template so it's in fact it's the template is a cookie cutter
template and there are a bunch of for each statements you know like going
through all these arrays so whatever you put here it goes to those entitlements uh feelings and
manifest file so it's pretty it's pretty flexible yeah but sure we have like some predefined cool
so when you say it's a cookie cutter thing it's not just like a template it literally uses the
Python cookie cutter library, right?
Yeah. Yeah.
So the template,
it's in a separate repository.
So every flat build command
the loss that template
and provides the data,
combines template and data.
Yeah, nice.
Yeah. And produces this Flutter app
and then it goes to Flutter build.
Cool.
It looks great. It looks great. And it also looks like a lot of work. So congratulations on making this far.
Thank you. Yeah, it's a lot of work.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Let's see. I wanted to just have you real quickly close out. I don't know where I stuck it. Somewhere in here. The roadmap for where you're going.
So maybe tell us.
So yeah.
What's in the future? What's,
what's in the near term that people can count on and then we'll wrap up our
show.
Sure. We, yeah,
maybe this roadmap is already outdated, but yeah,
first of all, we want to, we want to have this one, 1.0,
because it's maybe it's a psychological thing,
you know, it's like people,
developers feel stability and all when there is
1.0, it says that the framework is ready for seamless apps.
I mean, like,
I mean,
yeah, it's a commitment to sustainability, like we think
we're ready.
Right. And it's committed commitment for sustainability and
it's commitment for proper release schedule. So we'll keep this
release after releasing it and we'll be providing patches to
this 1.0, et cetera. So you can, you can start doing real
using 1.0. So it's 1.0 and we are we're doing a lot of work trying to
harmonize API trying to remove outdated stuff trying to like have consistent
naming conventions across different controls you know it's like property
names method names remove different duplicates so it's a lot of work and we're almost there
so definitely like
another thing is uh uh improving developer experience right so improving developer experience
part of the improving developer experience like for example we will be pre-installing all dependencies
uh to make flat build command work work really smooth in your computer like right now you have
to install flutter by cell but we'll be uh installing correct version of flutter on your
behalf and uh that's cool yeah that's cool yeah java java could be a real pain to install like
said it is java form yeah then your feet are people who have not been through
flutter projects they don't know they don't know all the little tools and the version mismatches
and i've got this version of android studio but the android sdk version wasn't checked correctly
and so now i can't you know like that what you're saying is there's a lot of stuff that you could
could help out with and make that smoother.
But it's challenging.
Yeah.
Yeah. And still, you need Android Studio or Xcode or Visual Studio.
Yeah. You can spend a lot of time configuring those things.
You know what? Maybe next year,
we're going to start working on the service.
I call it packaging and publishing service.
Okay.
So you could somehow link a GitHub branch, like a production branch or something.
If you push that, you guys grab it and you'll build all the assets?
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Nice.
Or you can push your code in this directory to this service and get artifact back,
you know, like MSI file or ATP file.
That'd be awesome, actually.
Yeah, that's very cool.
You need to deal with all these dependencies, all this stuff.
You just do your part, your Python code, and that's it.
And the rest will be done inside the cloud.
So that's the idea.
That's the plan.
Very promising.
I love it.
And I love all this work, all this progress you guys have made.
So thanks for coming back on and sharing with everyone.
Let's close it out.
Final call to action.
are interested in Flet.
What do you tell them?
So go ahead.
Download the latest version.
Try doing your app
and join our Discord channel.
So let us know what you think.
Yeah.
Awesome.
All right.
Thanks a bunch.
See you later.
Yeah.
Thank you, guys.
Bye.